# PhD-work-Fluid-Mechanics

Note: This repository contains Mathematica programs and graphs that are in my thesis. Feel free to refer to them but do not copy this work as it was original work submitted to Christ University, India to obtain a PhD degree.

The thesis work is concerned with Rayleigh-Bénard convection in a horizontal porous layer saturated with a viscoelastic fluid subject to a zero order exothermic chemical reaction. Modified Darcy law is employed to describe the fluid motion. The effect of viscoelasticity, chemical reaction, and rotation on the onset of convection is considered. The findings of the problems investigated in the thesis may prove useful in heat transfer application situations with viscoelastic fluids as working medium. 

The first problem is concerned with the study of convective instability in a Maxwell viscoelastic fluid. The problem of onset of convective instability in a horizontal inert porous layer saturated with a Maxwell viscoelastic fluid subject to zero-order chemical reaction is investigated by linear stability analysis. Modified Darcy-Maxwell model is used to describe the fluid motion. The horizontal porous layer is cooled from the upper boundary while an isothermal boundary condition is imposed at the lower boundary. In another case of the same study, the porous layer is cooled from the upper boundary while an adiabatic thermal boundary condition is imposed at the lower boundary. Closed form solution pertaining to the basic quiescent state is obtained. The resulting eigenvalue problem is solved approximately using the Galerkin method. The Rayleigh number, characterizing the stability of the system, is calculated as a function of viscoelastic parameter, Darcy-Prandtl number, normalized porosity, and the Frank-Kamenetskii number. The possibility of oscillatory instability is discussed in detail.

The second problem deals with the study of convective instability in Walters’ B viscoelastic fluid. Linear thermal instability in a horizontal inert porous layer saturated with viscoelastic fluid is studied to include the effect of chemical reaction and rotation. The flow in the porous medium is described using a modified Darcy-Walters’ B model. The horizontal porous layer is cooled from the upper boundary while an isothermal boundary condition is imposed at the lower boundary to start with. Further, the lower boundary is also considered to be of adiabatic nature. The Rayleigh number, characterizing the stability of the system, is calculated as a function of viscoelasticity parameter, Darcy number, normalized porosity, Prandtl number, Taylor number and the Frank-Kamenetskii number. Graphs have been plotted to depict the stability characteristics. Both stationary and oscillatory modes of instability are discussed. 

In the third problem, the convective instability in Rivlin-Ericksen viscoelastic fluid is studied. The effect of chemical reaction and rotation on the linear stability of a Rivlin-Ericksen fluid saturated horizontal densely-packed porous layer is investigated. The horizontal porous layer is cooled from the upper boundary while an isothermal boundary condition is imposed at the lower boundary to start with. Further, the lower boundary is also considered to be of adiabatic nature. The effect of viscoelastic parameter, Darcy number, modified-Prandtl number, normalized porosity, Taylor number and the Frank-Kamenetskii number on the stability of the system is investigated. Using a weighted residual method we calculate numerically the convective thresholds for both stationary and oscillatory instability. The effects of viscoelasticity, chemical reaction and rotation on the instability are emphasized.

The fourth problem has to do with the study of convective instability in an Oldroyd viscoelastic fluid. The effect of chemical reaction on the linear stability of an Oldroyd fluid saturated horizontal densely-packed porous layer is investigated. The porous layer is cooled from the upper boundary while two cases are investigated for different thermal boundary conditions of the lower boundary. Linear stability analysis suggests that there is a competition between the processes of viscous relaxation and thermal diffusion that causes the first convective instability to be oscillatory rather than stationary. The effect of Deborah number, strain-retardation parameter, Darcy-Prandtl number, normalized porosity, and the Frank-Kamenetskii number on the stability of the system is investigated. Using a weighted residual method we calculate numerically the convective thresholds for both stationary and oscillatory instability. The effects of viscoelasticity and chemical reaction on the instability are emphasized. Some existing results are reproduced as the particular cases of the study.
